in this After Effects tutorial we're
going to examine the math dot sign
expression this is a little bit of
JavaScript that allows you to have
properties oscillate in a regular sine
wave we're going to explore what it
means what it does how to control it
ideally by the end of this you'll learn
about math expressions after-effects and
each other I'm Evan Abrams and this is
math dot sign and after-effects so
before we open After Effects let's get
into just what math dot sign is now
certainly it's an expression we'll just
type capital m and then a th dot si N
and then some parentheses here
parentheses into an expression window
what does that mean if we hope to make
use of a thing we first need to
understand the thing or just copy and
paste and really hope that we work so so
math dot sine is the trigonometry to
calculate an angle of the thing or maybe
from science where it's used to model
waves for light and sound and for us
it's that same function it's that same
sine wave function so looking at this
thing as an expression we need to
understand the kind of input it's gonna
take and to expect the kind of output
it's going to give us inputs go here in
the argument zone between those
parentheses and really we just put in a
number and the output we get will be the
sine of that number so if we put in 0 or
1 or 2 or 11 then we get the sine of
that number that we put in the number
that we're putting in is treated as a
Radian now a Radian is a another measure
of angle so similar to degrees so you
could have you know this 90-degree angle
or this however many Radian angle that
is and in fact 180 degrees is equal to
PI radians or 3.14159 and so on radiant
but more on that later that'll be
important to know later the number that
it spits out the output though we're
gonna guess after putting in the radians
it's going to be a regular wave
oscillating between
-1 and 1 or negative 1 and 1 if we want
this change if we want to use this as an
expression to generate some movement
we're gonna have to use a value in that
argument that changes over time and I
would recommend using the word time
we've covered the time property on other
tutorials so if you want to read about
that but the big thing about to know is
that this word will now become whatever
the time is in seconds on whatever frame
we're looking at but taking the sign of
the time alone is not super useful we
need more than just oscillating between
minus 1 and 1
we should amplify that so if we modify
this by another number we multiply this
whole thing then we're getting something
that we can probably use and this
multiplication that we're doing to it
this increasing the distance away from
zero is what we call the amplitude but I
think we need more control than that
it's not enough to say how much it
oscillates how tall this wave gets I
want to be able to say when is it
oscillating how often you know what is
the frequency of oscillations that are
gonna happen how many times per second
does this wave repeat now I could make
it repeat once per second exactly by
multiplying the time here by 2 times pi
if we want this wave to repeat twice
every second then we would just multiply
this result here by 2 so we just slip a
little 2 in there and then it's working
out alternatively we could describe the
way this wave is repeating as having a
period a set distance between the zero
and the zero when it repeats the wave
what is that distance in time we would
call that the period so in this case
we're looking at a one-second period and
if we want to control the wave using
that we would just multiply here in
inside the brackets by 1 over whatever
we want the period to be so if we want
the period to be 3 seconds with multiply
it by 1 over 3 and thanks to how math
works that's what we end up with but I
think it's time to open up after-effects
and actually use this to make something
alright as promised after-effects is
open let's get into some examples the
first thing I want to show you is making
something's position change in that
lovely sine wave this is where the
rubber really meets the road and we have
to actually type things into an
expression window so I've got a
composition open I've got a shape layer
and I've got a null object
I have parented my shape layer to the
null object so that the position is zero
zero when it's right here this will make
the numbers a little bit easier for us
to understand so I'm gonna hold down alt
click on position and it's time to start
typing we know because this is position
the end of the expression needs to be X
comma Y that's the end goal we want to
fill something in for the first part of
this property and fill something in for
the second part and I think we want this
to just go up and down just oscillate up
and down so the X can be equal to
whatever the value is here so in square
brackets put a 0 meaning it'll always
reference the first part here for X
there are some other variables I'd like
to put in such as a for amplitude that
we talked about so let's make the
amplitude 240 let's make the frequency
let's say F equals 0.5 0.5 times a
second so close that out so we're
amplitude frequency now I think we need
to write the real thing so we're gonna
say y equals math dot sign and our
little argument zone parenthesis we're
gonna multiply all of this by the
amplitude close that out and inside the
brackets like we've done we are going to
type time times 2 times or multiply or
you say that math dot PI that's how we
get the PI in here any time we want it
and then times F for the frequency and
cross your fingers we've done it all
right well it didn't make a noise so we
hit play and we can see it's oscillating
look at it go which is not super
exciting if we look at who click this
button here we can go to the graph
editor and we can enjoy looking at the
value graph and we can see these
oscillations happening right here in the
graph editor if you look at a speed
graph it looks like this just a bunch of
bumps but they're all perfect and
regular bump now you're probably saying
well Evan I could do this with a loop
and maybe some keyframes well that's
true but the purpose here is you can use
this
build and hopefully do more interesting
things with your own creative mind
something I will say that this does a
lot better than keyframes are things
like decay so we could have this decay
or increase by say multiplying this by
time again inside the brackets and now
what's gonna happen is it's gonna go
slow fast fast fast forever / / / / /
which is something that is a little bit
difficult to do with keyframes we're
able to do this using the power of
expression if you want to go more in
depth I would recommend you read all the
articles by Danny Bert's
head on over to his website links to
that in the description the man is a
genius and very generous with his
knowledge and his site continues to be
invaluable so we've got this thing
oscillating a problem you might run into
is if you start moving this layer
forward or backward in time you'll
notice that it doesn't move its position
you know it's not relative to the start
of the layer so if you want to make that
happen you can hit T and type in a new
variable time - in point and close that
out and then just change the time in
here to be that T meaning we're taking
the time we're at say 6 seconds and
subtracting the current time of the
endpoint which is around to here 6 minus
2 is 4 so we get the value that would
have happened at 4 meaning we can move
this forward and backward and we kind of
have our oscillations baked into the
layer rather than being relative to the
composition time that's how we would
apply this to position what if we wanted
to apply this - I don't know scale so go
over to the scale here here's an example
with scale I'm just copying and I am
pasting because I am lazy we don't need
to type it out again and we paste it
here on the scale what's going on
well it's doing pretty much the same
thing because if we want say the
percentage to change the same we would
need to have the same variable here and
the outputs of Y comma Y so we can
probably get rid of the X part we don't
need that make that go away so now it's
getting larger and smaller you know if
we look at its graph we have a look at
the graph going on here you can see that
it's going up and down and so dipping
here into the negatives and that is
because we oscillate between positive
and negative of the amplitude it's not
going down to a hundred and backup it's
actually going into the negative so if
we had something on here it would be
flipping so that's something to be aware
of when you use this on scale so now
let's apply this to the opacity so we go
in here we could talk to the opacity
stick it on there paste and just like we
had to modify the output the output
really only needs to be the single
variable the y equals math that sine etc
so now have this interesting kind of
stoplight blinking which is great or it
likes a blinking light but if we go into
the graph this graph looks different
this looks like a square graph now
that's happening because we're pushing
the values above and below where we want
to be so I would adjust my amplitude
down maybe we adjust it down to a
hundred so we're going from a hundred to
negative that means that we're getting
half the wave because the rest of it
goes below zero and opacity cannot hold
values below zero so maybe we set this
to fifty and then we go Y plus 50 so
then we end up with it oscillating from
100% to zero on and off like so so
sometimes you're gonna have to massage
the outputs a little bit depending on
the kind of property that you're putting
it on our final example the last example
let's do a little bit more with the
position I'm gonna duplicate that so we
have position + rotation now let's add
some rotation to this you can't really
tell if this is rotating so let's a poly
star to that I'm gonna rotate it 90
degrees so it's pointing off to the side
so what I would like it to do is to
point up when it's going up and then
point down as it's going down like the
arrow is pointing the direction it's
going to go so we go to the rotation and
hold down alt we paste you know this is
the same thing from from the opacity and
the final thing is gonna be the Y right
for the amplitude let's make it 45 it's
gonna go 45 degrees one way 45 degrees
the other and what does that do well
this is not what I was hoping it is
pointing up when it goes up but it's not
exactly what I was hoping
so here I'm gonna talk about signs twin
brother cousin I don't know they're the
same but a little bit different and
really the difference is that sign
begins its life at zero and then goes up
and then down
whereas cosign begins its life at 1 and
dips down to minus 1 and then back up so
if I type in math dot coasts here cos
now we're off to something we dip we dip
what I'll need to do here is to make
sure that I can add my own value by
adding the value there so now now it's
pointing in the right direction to begin
with so there we go
now it's pointing down pointing up
pointing down pointing up so if we have
a look at the graphs making sure this
little button here is on let me get the
position make sure it's a little button
is on we have have a look at those in
the graph editor you can see that the
waves are offset from each other so the
peak of this one is that the middle
point of this one so that's how cosine
sine can interact with each other and
even though I didn't mention it for the
entire tutorial Coast works exactly the
same as sine you know the only
difference is that it's offset this has
been Evan Abrams
talking about math not sine in
after-effects if you've enjoyed this
tutorial please subscribe to this
channel this is a great place to learn
about After Effects motion design all
that great stuff new tutorials go up
pretty regularly around here so you
should subscribe and turn on
notifications so you know when that
happens if you've had any trouble
understanding this stuff please let me
know in the comments ask questions and
I'll try to answer them as best I can
if you'd like to get your hands on the
project files these examples that we
worked on here head on over to Evan
Abrams comm or check out the links in
the cards in the description to pick
those up if you're intimidated by
expressions can be helpful II just
dissect someone else's rather than
starting fresh if you have a question
about After Effects in general or motion
design anything at all hit me up on
Twitter at ICI Abrams give me a follow
on there and we will hang out on the
Internet
thank you so much for watching and if
you're subscribed I'll see you around
the internet thanks again and have a
nice day
[Music]